Factors of alternating sums of powers of [5pt] math-q -Narayana numbers
Victor J. W. Guo and Qiang-Qiang Jiang School of Mathematical Sciences, Huaiyin Normal University, Huai’an, Jiangsu 223300, People’s Republic of China jwguo@hytc.edu.cn [10pt] Department of Mathematics, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, People’s Republic of China 972126862@qq.com 
 Abstract. The math-q -Narayana numbers math-N math-q math-n math-k  and math-q -Catalan numbers math-C math-n math-q  are respectively defined by math-N math-q math-n math-k math-:and math-C  where math-n math-k math-i math-q . We prove that, for any positive integers math-n  and math-r , there holds math-k math-n math-q math-j math-N math-r math-C  where math-j math-r . We also propose several related conjectures.
Keywords: math-q -binomial coefficients, math-q -Narayana numbers, math-q -Catalan numbers
AMS Subject Classifications: 11A07, 05A30
The Catalan numbers math-C math-n  play an important role in combinatorics (see ). It is well known that for any positive integer math-n , math-C math-n math-k math-N  where math-N math-n math-k  are called Narayana numbers (see ).
In the past few years, many congruences on sums or alternating sums of binomial coefficients and combinatorial numbers, such as Catalan numbers, Apéry numbers, central Delannoy numbers, Schröder numbers, Franel numbers, have been obtained by Z.-W. Sun  and other authors .
In this paper, motivated mainly by Z.-W. Sun’s work, we shall prove the following congruence on alternating sums of powers of Narayana numbers.
Let math-n  and math-r  be positive integers. Then math-k math-n math-N math-r math-C  
We know that some congruences may have nice math-q -analogues (see, for example, ). This is also the case for the congruence (1.1). Recall that the math-q -shifted factorials (see ) are defined by math-a math-q  and math-a math-q math-n  for math-n  and the math-q -binomial coefficients are defined as math-n math-k math-q math-:if0⩽k⩽n, math-:otherwise.  For convenience, we let math-n math-q  be a math-q -integer. It is natural to define the math-q -Narayana numbers math-N math-q math-n math-k  and the math-q -Catalan numbers math-C math-n math-q  as follows: math-N math-q math-n math-k math-C  It is not difficult to see that both math-q -Narayana numbers and math-q -Catalan numbers are polynomials in math-q  with nonnegative integer coefficients (see ). Note that, the definition of math-N math-q math-n math-k  here differs by a factor math-q math-k  from that in . We have the following math-q -analogue of Theorem 1.1.
Let math-n  and math-r  be positive integers and let math-j math-r . Then math-k math-n math-q math-j math-N math-r math-C  
It is easily seen that when math-q  the math-q -congruence (1.2) reduces to (1.1). It seems that (1.2) also holds for math-j math-r  (see (3.1) in Conjecture 3.4 for a more general form).
Noticing that math-n math-k math-q  we can rewrite Theorem 1.2 in the following equivalent form.
Let math-n  and math-r  be positive integers and let math-j math-r . Then math-q math-n math-r math-k math-j  math-n math-r  
In the paper , Guo, Jouhet and Zeng proved the following result.
For all positive integers math-n math-m  and math-j math-m , the alternating sum math-q math-n math-i math-m math-k math-j  where math-n math-m , is a polynomial in math-q  with nonnegative integer coefficients.
In what follows, we will show that the congruence (2.2) can be deduced from combining two special cases of Theorem 2.2.
Denote the left-hand side of (2.2) by math-S math-n math-r math-j . By the relation (2.1), it is clear that math-S math-n math-r math-j  is a polynomial in math-q  with integer coefficients. Letting math-m math-r , math-n math-r , and math-n math-r  in Theorem 2.2, we see that math-q math-n math-r math-k math-j math-Z  which can also be written as math-n math-S math-r math-j math-Z math-q  Namely, math-S math-n math-r math-j , or math-n math-r math-S math-j  On the other hand, letting math-m math-r , math-n math-r , and math-n math-r  in Theorem 2.2, we have math-q math-n math-r math-k math-j math-Z  which, by the relation math-q math-n , can be rewritten as math-n math-r math-S math-j math-Z math-q  Namely, math-n math-r math-S math-j  
It is easy to see that the polynomials math-n math-r  and math-n math-r  are relatively prime. Therefore, by the Euclid algorithm for polynomials, there exist polynomials math-P math-q  and math-Q math-q  in math-q  with rational coefficients such that math-P math-q math-n math-r math-Q  It follows from (2.3)–(2.5) that the congruence math-S math-n math-r math-j  holds in the ring math-Q math-q . In other words, there exists a polynomial math-R math-q math-Q  such that math-S math-n math-r math-j math-R math-q  Since the polynomials math-S math-n math-r math-j  and math-n math-r  are in math-Z math-q , and the leading coefficient of the latter is one, the identity (2.6) means that math-R math-q math-Z . This completes the proof.
It seems that Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 can be further generalized as follows.
Let math-n math-m  be positive integers. Then math-k math-n math-i math-m  math-n math-m math-i  where math-n math-m .
Let math-n  and math-r  be positive integers and let math-j math-r . Then math-C math-n math-q math-k math-j math-N math-r  is a polynomial in math-q  with nonnegative integer coefficients.
Note that the upper bound math-r  of math-j  in Conjecture 3.2 seems to be the best possible. Numerical calculation implies that Conjecture 3.2 does not hold when math-j math-r . Furthermore, we have the following generalization of Conjecture 3.2.
For all positive integers math-n math-m  and math-j math-m , the expression math-n math-m math-i math-k math-q math-j  where math-n math-m , is a polynomial in math-q  with nonnegative integer coefficients.
We end the paper with the following math-q -analogue of Conjecture 3.1.
Let math-n math-m  be positive integers, and let math-f math-k  be a polynomial in math-k  with integer coefficients. Then math-k math-n math-q math-f math-i math-m  math-n math-m math-i  where math-n math-m . In particular, for any positive integer math-n , we have math-k math-n math-q math-f math-N math-r math-C  
 Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 11371144), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (grant BK20161304), and the Qing Lan Project of Education Committee of Jiangsu Province.
